---
layout: writeup
title: Write-Behind Logging
full_title: "Write-Behind Logging"
author: Joy Arulraj, Matthew Perron, Andrew Pavlo
link: https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~jarulraj/papers/2017.wbl.vldb.pdf
publication: VLDB'16
comments: true
categories:
- writeup
---

The key idea is that DBMS logs what parts of the database have changed rather than how it was changed.

### HDDs
Modern HDDs are based on the same high-level design principles from the 1960s: a magnetic platter spins and an arm reads data off of it with a block-granularity (typically 4 KB). Since moving the platter and the arm is a mechanical process, these drives are the slowest of all the durable storage devices. Sequential reads and writes to the device are faster than random accesses as disk seek requires the arm to be re-positioned.

### SSDs
SSDs are faster than HDDs because they use non-volatile NAND storage cells; their read and write latencies are up to three orders of magnitude lower than an average HDD. However, three problems remain that make SSDs less than ideal for DBMSs. Foremost is that they only support block-oriented data access. Each storage cell in a SSD can only be written to a fixed number of times before it can on longer reliably stora the data. Lastly, SSDs are currently 3-10x more expensive per GB than an HHD.

NVM technologies, such as phase change memory, STT-RAM, and memristors, provide low-latency, byte-addressable loads and stores. In contrast to other durable storage devices that use the PCIe or SATA interfaces, NVM can be plugged into DIMM slots to deliver higher bandwidths and lower latencies to CPUs.