---
layout: post
title: What's "New" in NewSQL?
comments: true
categories:
- blog
tags:
- system
---

NewSQL has become the new sexy in the DBMS area. Many startups tout their products as NewSQL databases.
But is NewSQL really new? How does NewSQL came about and what does the term mean?
I will share some facts and thoughts below.

This article is mostly inspired by the greate article "What's Really New with NewSQL?" (by Andrew Pavlo and Matthew Aslett, SIGMOD Record, June 2016).

### A Little About The History

The first DBMSs came ont in the mid 1960s, e.g. IBM's IMS.
It seperates an application's code from data that it operates on, and frees developers to write applications without concerns about data maniputation performance.
IMS was later followed by the pioneering work in the early 1970s on the first relational DBMSs, IBM's System R and INGRES from the University of California.
The late 1980s and early 1990s saw the rise and fall of object-oriented DBMSs, many of whose ideas are incorporated into document-oriented NoSQL systems over two decades later.
Moreover, two all-star open source databases, MySQL and PostgreSQL, starts during the 1990s.

Radical changes took place with the arrival of 2000s.
Internet applications sprouted around the world, and scalability is the new dimension.
Systems need to scale to support massive concurrent users and provide on-line services with high availability.
To support this, custom middlewares are developed to shard single-node DBMSs over a cluster of less expensive machines.
With the help of such middlewares, the system presents a single logical database to users, while data and queries are stored and executed in the whole cluster.
Two notable examples are eBay's Oracle-based cluster[1] and Google's MySQL-based cluster[2].

Early sharding middlewares faced challenges when it comes to join tables or updating more than one record in a transaction.
At that time, many companies, especially internet companies, re-thought their needs of consistency and correctness at the expense of availability and performance.
And many of them turn their focus away from traditional DBMSs and develop their own database systems.
Likewise, relational model is also under heated debates that whether it is the best way to represen an application's data.
Furthur, many thought that using SQL may also be an overkill for simple look-up queries.

These rethinks add impetus to the NoSQL movement in the mid of late 2000s[3].
The key of this movement is to develop new database systems that forgo strong transactional guarantees and the relational model of tranditional DBMSs.
Eventual consistency and K-V/Graph/Document models become the new standard equipments.
The two well-known pioneering systems are Google's BigTable and Amazon's Dynamo.
Based on them, many similar systems, including Facebook's Cassandra (based on BigTable and Dynamo) and PowerSet's HBase (based on BigTable), were born to follow the fashion.
Besides, among startups, the most well-known one is MongoDB.

NoSQL led the fashion, and at the same time created more chaos.
By the end of the 2000s, many applications found themselves at awkward situations that they cannot give up strong transactional and consistency requirements as they thought.
And it was painful for developers to spend too much energy writing code to handle inconsistent data.
Thus, it is in this environment that brought about **NewSQL** systems, which aims to provide the same scalable performance of NoSQL for OLTP read-write workloads while still maintaining ACID guarantees for transactions.

### The Rise and New Features


### Uphill Battle

<hr/>
#### References
[1]R. Shoup and D. Pritchett. The ebay architecture. SD Forum, November 2006.
[2]J. Shute, R. Vingralek, B. Samwel, B. Handy, C. Whipkey, E. Rollins, M. Oancea, K. Littlefield, D. Menestrina, S. Ellner, J. Cieslewicz, I. Rae, T. Stancescu, and H. Apte. F1: A distributed sql database that scales. Proc. VLDB Endow., 6(11):1068–1079, Aug. 2013.
[3]R. Cattell. Scalable sql and nosql data stores. SIGMOD Rec., 39:12–27, 2011.
